HTTP has been around since the 90s.
How has it evolved over the years?
What is the latest development?
Let’s take a look.
Here is the progression of the HTTP versions so far,
from HTTP/1, to 1.1, to 2, and now to HTTP/3.
Let’s look at each one more closely.
HTTP/1 came out in 1996.
It is built on top of TCP.
Every request to the same server
requires a separate TCP connection.
HTT/1.1 soon followed in 1997.
It introduceda keep-alive mechanism
so a connection could be reuse
for more than a single request.
Thepersistent connections reduce request latency
because the client does not need to initiate
expensive TCP three-way handshake for every request.
It's worthwhile to note that HTTP/1.1 also
added HTTP pipelining.
This in theory allows the client to send multiple requests
before waiting for each response.
The response must be received
in the same order as to requests
It was trickyto implement correctly
and many proxy servers in between
did not handle pipelining properly.
Its support was eventually removed
from many web browsers.
HTTP/1.1 with pipelining also suffers
from an issue called head of line blocking.
Without align blocking,
subsequent requests onthe same connection
must wait for the previous requests
to complete.
If a request is blockedfor any reason like packet loss,
all subsequent requests on the same
connection are also impacted.
To keep loading performance at an acceptable level,
browsers normally keep multiple TCP connections
to the same server and send requests to it
in parallel
HTTP/2 was published in 2015.
HTTP/2introduces HTTP streams,
where multiple streams of requests
could be sent to the same server on
a single TCP connection.
Unlike HTT/1.1 pipelining,
each stream is independent of each other
and itdoes not need to be sent or received in order.
HTTP/2 solves the headline blocking issue
at theapplication layer
but the issue still exists in the transport layer with TCP.
Also note that HTTP/2 introduced a push capability
to allow servers to send updates to the clients whenever new data is available
without requiring a client to poll.
HTTP/3 began as a draft in 2020
and hasrecently been published in June 2022.
It uses a new protocol called QUIC
insteadof TCP as the underlying transport protocol.
QUIC is based on UDP.
It introduces streams asthe first-class citizen
at the transport layer.
QUIC streams share the same quick connection
so  no additional handshakes are required
to create new ones.
QUIC streams are delivered independently.
In most cases, packet loss affecting one stream
doesn't affect others.
This is how QUIC eliminatesthe head of line blocking
at the transport layer.
QUIC is designed for mobile heavy internet usage.
People carrying smartphones constantly switch from one network to another
as they move about their day.
With TCP, the handoff of one connection
from one network to another is sluggish.
QUIC implements a concept called connectionID,
which allows connections to move between
IP addresses and network interfaces
quicklyand reliably.
Even though HTTP/3 has just been standardized,
it is used by 25% of thewebsites and supported
by many web browsers.
if you would like to learn more about systemdesign,
check out our books and weekly newsletter.
Please subscribe if you learned something new.
Thank you so much and we'll see you next time.